Infirst enough is about
recording.
Share my screen.
So laser points.
OK, let's start.
Actually today we can. I mean,
we try to finish the.
3rd chapter which is about the.
Uh. The gate level
minimizations. Or
Simplification.
We be there. Might be some
little topics for the next week,
but we cannot. I mean, primarily
finish this chapter. So let's
start before I start again like
before. So in order to see
everyone has the focus to the
slide. Today you're gonna
continue some math, so I need
your full attention.
So please send me some feedbacks
or emoji icons that I can.
See that you have
the focus factor.
Thank you Riley.
I.
I.
Just in general.
I believe Gabby Galley my
pronouncing your name
correctly, I'll be.
So.
How do you pronounce your name?
Thank you nicolous,
Dennis thank you.
Let me fix you.
Presenter.
Made you presenter a gulizio so
you can. You can say your name.
. Yes, yes, go ahead.
How do you pronounce your name?
, sorry about that, so
no worries, thank you.
Thank you so much.
Hey.
Participant again.
So seems everyone.
Everyone is ready, so
let's start.
So in the last lecture we said
that it's good to minimize the
logic circuits because of I mean
cost so, but we said the
different factors. Sometimes
they are in conflict with each
other, but we try to minimize.
The cause the number of bits,
number of inputs in order.
Sometimes area is very small, so
you have to do that. So because
of these factors and reducing
the cost and increasing the
efficiency we put, he proposed
two methods to minimize the
logic circuits or Boolean
function. The first one was is
on the Boolean algebra or we said
that algebraically, we minimize
the. Check it also called
algebraic manipulation of the
Boolean function. The second was
the second one is the map
method, which we're gonna
introduce you today.
for the Boolean algebra the way we
minimize the circuits. By Boolean
algebra, we introduce algebra as
three elements. 1st is a set of
as a as a structure with three
sets. The first set is a set of
elements, the second set is the
set of operators, and the third
is a set of axioms that we
accept as true, and we don't ask
for proof, we just take it as it
is as a true statement.
We put some example of elements
such as Binary Sets Zero and
one or signed integer set. I
mean from minus Infinity to zero
to plus Infinity.
Example of a set of operators
would be addition or
multiplication or addition,
subtraction, multiplication,
division, etc. You said that the
operators are either Unary in
that they only accept one operand
. It may be binary,
meaning that they accept two
operand or sometimes they
are ternary that they accept
three operant are. In general
we can have n aray operators
that accept n operand.
And we said that George Boole
was the first guy. He was a
logician and mathematician. In
54 he introduced.
A new algebra for a thinking I
mean in a formal way, and that's
why we called a structure he
introduced as a Boolean algebra,
but later way later in 1904,
Huntington Beach was a
mathematician and he practiced
on pure mathematics. He actually
formalized the Boolean algebra
more. Actually after him we
recognize the. Algebra
introduced by George
Boolean algebra, so
he did a lot. I mean the
significant contribution
to the Boolean algebra.
What did was that he
introduced some postulates.
Let's assume this is a new
world by him. For the axioms
assumptions that we said we
accept as the true or we don't
ask for any proof was
possible, it was. There are
six postulates. It's the first
one was closure with set, with
basically says that.
A set given a bind given an
operator is called closed if the
result of the operator is still
a member set.
for instance in the signed integer
set at addition. This set of
signed integer set is closed
under the operator addition
because after adding two
elements of the set S result is
this member of S the same is
for the subtraction to multiplication
Negation, an factorial. So if
you apply factorial on the set, an
element of this set S.
There's lots of the factorial
is gonna be is still the
member of the SAT S so we
say as is closed under the
factorial operator.
However, we said that sometimes
an operator is open or a set is
open with regard to an operator,
for instance power.
You could simply, uh, find a
counterexample. for instance 2
and minus one if you, uh, if you
will in 2 to the power of minus
one if you do.
This one, the result is 1 / 2
which is 0.5.
The result is not a member of S
as a result we can say that S
is not close under the power.
Interesting set is the binary set
with the element zero and one,
and we said that the Binary set
is closed under or and and not.
Operators as the result is still
the member of this set as.
However, the negation, the
Binary set is not close under
the negation operator, because
you can simply find one and
minus one is not a member of
this Set. So as Binary set is
not closed under the negation.
Operator. The second possibility
is commutatively. Specifically
says that the binary operator is
called commutative if the order
of the operand doesn't matter.
So X operator Y is the same as Y
operator X, so the order of the
operand doesn't matter for the
operator. binary operator.
And we said that in the sign
integer set. Addition and
multiplication and has this
property the commutativity,
because the order of XO X added
by Y is equal to Y added to the
order doesn't matter. The same
is for the multiplication.
How about the subtraction is not
commutative under the sign integer
set because you cannot
reorder the operand X - y is not
equal to y - X.
Subtraction doesn't have
the commutative property.
The Binary set as we already saw
by truth table OR AND NAND NOR XOR
and XNOR
all these operators are commutative
because the order of the operand
or the order of the input to
these gates doesn't matter.
Associative property is the
third postulate, which says that
a binary operator is associative
if the order of applying the
operator doesn't matter. But if
you apply the binary operator
multiple times for instance X
operator. y operators Z? So
it means that we first apply the
operator between Y&Z and then we
apply the operator with the X.
If the operator is associative,
doesn't matter which operator
actually applies first, so is
this. There's result is the same
as if you apply the operator on
the X&Y and then on this.
So the result you can simply
drop the parenthesis because
the order of applying the
operator doesn't matter.
So this is called
associativity property.
for signed integer Set we said that
addition multiplication
Subtraction. It don't need to
put the parentheses because
order of these operators doesn't
matter. As you can see
here, you already saw
this in discrete math.
However, power operator is not
associative under the signs.
A signed integer said, and the
reason is the order of applying
power is important because here
you can see for example. So 2
to the power of one or three.
The result is different from if
you apply the 1st power this power
first to two to the power of 1
and then to the power three. So
these two results are not the
same. So we can say that power
is not associative under the
set. Of these signed integers.
For the Binary set with the
zero and one as, the
elements are both the OR an
AND operators are
associative, so can simply
drop the parentheses as we
already knew this.
A fourth I postulate or property
is called identity, meaning that
applying the operator.
On any element of S and
the identity element
doesn't have any impact. So
X operator E is equal to E
operator X, which is equal
to X. So applying the
operator with identity
element as one of the
operands as an impact.
in the sign integer set for the
addition operator identity
element is 0, meaning that
adding with 0 doesn't have any
impact. For the multiplication
operator, identity is 1, meaning
that multiplying with one any
element from the S * 1 doesn't
have any impact, so the result is
the same as X.
However, however, we couldn't
find identity elements for
subtraction in the sign integer.
Because you cannot say that any
element from the S
Subtracted from zero is the same
as X because X - 0 although is
X, but it is not
commutative, so 0 - X is not
equal to X is equal to minus X.
So as a result, a 0 is not an
identity element for subtraction
in the sign integers.
But the binary set. We said
that for the OR and AND we have
identity. Elements, but the OR
the identity element is 0,
meaning that adding any element
oring with zero for any elements
is equal to X. The same I mean
x' 0. Is equal to 0 or X
which is equal to X.
For the and operator have
identity element one because any
element and with one is equal to
that element. So adding with one
doesn't have any impact.
So you see that the OR an AND
get kind of acting similar to
addition and multiplication.
That's why we use the same
symbol for. And an OR and
addition multiplication.
Similar, not exactly the same.
The 5th postulate was
inverse, meaning that
for any element in X.
Should be another element y
this might be exactly the same
as X or another distinct
element. And if we apply the
operator of these two elements
X&Y and the result is the
identity element of the
operator, we can say that X&Y
has a relationship.
And this relationship is called
inverse because if you apply on
that operator on these two
elements, the result is a
specific element of the S, which
is the identity element of the
operator. And this is commutative.
So this relationship be
represented like this? y is
the inverse of X or X is the
inverse of Y?
for instance in the sign in the
inverse of any element is the
negative form of that element.
So for any x in the sign
integer. Can negative elements
so minus X or negative negative
x is the inverse of that
element because If you apply the
addition on x last minus X or
minus X + X, there is is the
identity element of addition
which is 0.
As a result, we can say that the
relationship between X and minus
X is the inverse relationship.
For the multiplication, we don't
have this property because you can
simply find 2 elements, find an
element in the set, for instance
two that you cannot find any
other element from the set S
such that if you apply the
multiplication, you end up with
the identity element of
multiplication one. For two, the
identity of the other elements
must be one.
Divided by two, which is 0.5. In
order to produce the identity
element of one thats 1 / 2
Is not an element of S, so we
can say that we find a
counterexample exam at least
one element of S doesn't have
the inverse element. As a
result, as is not, doesn't
have the inverse property
under the multiplication
operator.
Interestingly, in the Binary set
for both the OR an AND, we don't
have the inverse property.
And this is the reason 'cause If
you or one.
Any elements of S either zero
or one the result gonna be 1.
Already knew that, but the
result is not the identity
element of or which is zero.
Same is for the AND operator.
So the Binary set doesn't
have the inverse property.
And the last property was the
distributive property. Or postulate.
It says that given two binary
operators in the set S, these
operators are distributed for
each other. If this equation
actually holds true.
So basically X operator.
I mean this is called
Section Sign X section sign,
y dagger sign Z?
If this equation if this term.
Is equal to this?
A term I mean meaning x.
A section sign why dagger? Sign
X section signs. We could say
that X can be disturbed and
distribute over the parentheses
in the left side.
And if it is equal to this
one, if we distribute X from
the right side to the
parenthesis, say that X with
the operator I mean section
sign can distribute inside the
parenthesis over the dagger
sign.
So you already knew the
distributive property. But
this is the formal
definition of the
distributive postulate or
property.
So then we introduce the Boolean
Algebra, which says that any
algebraic structure with these
properties and is boolean,
meaning that any set with at
least two elements.
And these two elements
must be distinct.
It could have more than two
elements, 3 4 at least
two elements of this set
must be distinct. An exist.
Also, there must be 2 binary
operators. These two binary
operators must have
identity elements.
Also, the set S as must be closed,
commutative and distributive for
these two binary operators,
though so far these are the
possibly introduced so far, but
there is a new postulate which
replaces the inverse
postulate. This is called
compliment. Uh, we said that in
the binary set we cannot have
inverse property as if we apply.
It's back here if we apply the or.
On any element. So for one or
gonna be always one. So the
result is not the identity
element for 2 zero.
Instead of invest with we find
in new postulate compliment.
So we said that although we
apply the operator and the
operator and with the
identity element not for this
operator, but the identity
element for the other
operator called this
compliment.
And we. The relationship between
X&Y is not inverse relationship
anymore, it is a new
relationship with compliment,
and we should show like this. we said
that y is the complement of X
instead of just putting minus
one which was the inverse
property. Put the this prime
sign or bar sign.
Exactly as Not operator
as we already introduced.
Thought this was the topics we
covered. I mean, last lecture.
So let's start a new topic.
Continue the.
So basically we introduce all
these math to minimize the
Boolean expression. So today
we're going to see how we can
use it Boolean algebra to
simplify the function.
In 1937, as we already said,
Shannon was the first who used
the Boolean algebra from the
math, and the huntingtons's
postulates. In order to build a
logic circuits that I mean
incorporate the electrical power
build machines. so in his
master thesis. He introduced an
instance Boolean algebra.
Which is called switching
algebra or two valued boolean
algebra. So this algebra is
just an instance of an example
of the Boolean algebra. Let's
see what is switching algebra
or two values algebra.
He said that let's pick S as
the set of zero and one
that's the only element. So
this satisfies the first
condition of the Boolean
algebra. We have two
elements, and these two
elements are distinct.
The second property is
introduced two operator and an
or so. The section sign could
be an and the dagger sign could
be or and this is the. This
satisfied the second condition
of Boolean algebra, so so far
can see that the switching
algebra is still a Boolean
algebra, but we have to check
other conditions.
You already saw that the ask the
Binary said close under and or.
So this condition actually
satisfied also the AND and or
operator is commutative and
distributive over each other. So
are these AND and OR. For
this set, I mean can be commutative
and distributive. Also the and
an or. We already saw that has
identity elements for the and we
have the identity element one or
the OR we have the identity element
0. So we see that it satisfies
the 4th condition of the
Boolean algebra. So we see that
the switching algebra is very
close to the Boolean algebra
only condition we have to show
is that switching algebra has
the complement property and as a
result Sweeting Algebra is
Boolean algebra entity.
So compliment we can prove this
by just prove this two
statement. So any elements so
zero is an element.
we could find another
element from the set which
is 1 and we applied and the
result is the identity
element of the other
operator. So if we and the
result in the identity
element of OR.
Sample the OR if you apply or an
zero and one. The result is the
identity element of AND so.
Not inverse of each other, but
they are compliments of each
other. So as a result we can say
that zero is the complement of
one or one is the complement of
zero. As I said, This is exactly
the not of the binary variables,
so we already knew that the not
of zero is 1. The not of one is
0, so compliment is another name
for the not operator.
So based on the last in the
4th I mean.
statement we see that the
switching algebra satisfies
the complement property of the
Boolean algebra. So as a
result switching algebra is called
Boolean algebra because of
satisfying all the five
property of the Boolean
algebra.
But what's the use of this?
So before you see the use of
the Boolean algebra?
In Computer Science you will see
other algebraic structures. For
instance, in the 3rd or 4th year
gonna take another course called
database. In the database you
see that there is a deep
mathematical background behind
the database which is called
Relational Algebra. So in other
disciplines of computer science
would see another. I mean
different algebraic structure.
So be prepared for the
algebraic or math, just
behind the practical topics
of the computer science.
So let's see what's the use of
the Boolean Algebra. Boolean
algebra has some basic
theorems that can be proved by
postulates for the postulate
we assume they are true, but
for the theorem we have to
prove they are true. We can
prove the theorem, by the
postulates and these theorems
helps us to minimize the
function.
The first theorem. So we want
to prove that X or X' X or
X is equal to X in general
form if you apply the Or gate
multiple times and a binary
variable is, the result is the
same as just a binary
variable, so it doesn't
happen.
But this is a very easy way to
reduce a boolean function. So in
the left side you can see you
need one or gate two input, but
in the right side you can see
that there is no need for, so
this is 1 easy way to reduce the
Boolean function. So let's prove
the theory. Although this is
trivial and you can prove it by
truth table by using postulate,
it is like this.
So X or X bar can be
rewritten as X or X X or X
can be rewritten like X or X
and by one and this is because
of the identity element of the
and operator which is 1. So
you can add any term with one
doesn't have any impact
However, the one.
This is result of the complement
property already knew that any
binary variable or with its
complements, it is equal to the
identity element , so one is
equal to X or X Bar.
And then this one we can extract
X as you can see here. This
is kind of distributing Or over the
AND, so you can extract X from
these two parentheses.
And it becomes X or X and x bar,
so it's kind of distributing or over
AND. 'cause of the distributive
property of OR over AND?
And then. 'cause of the
complement property X and
X'? These are complemented
each other, so and with each
other with becom, the identity
element of the other operator
before, so it becomes zero.
'cause of the complement
property? An X or 0 ,0 is the
identity element of.
doesn't have any
influence, so it becomes X so X
or X is always equal to X and
General Form X or X multiple
times is exactly the same as.
This is very easy, but it's very
helping theorem in order to
reduce the number of gates.
Another basic theorem is this.
We already knew there. Now
we're going to prove it using
the Boolean algebra instead of
using truth table.
We already knew that Oring with
one is always one, so anything
Or with one is equal to 1.
So you saw that if we have a
digit one in the one input
of the OR we don't have to
wait for other binary
variables, just we can output
one.
Now we're gonna prove it, with
postulates so.
X or one can be rewritten as or
one and with one. This is
because of the anding with. One
doesn't have any impact.
And one can be rewritten as
complements for X or X'.
These are the complement of each
other with over becomes the
identity element of AND.
And then now you can extract
X because of the distributive
property of OR over AND.
Here is the result.
So X or one and OR and
one x' as we know one
is the identity element
doesn't have any impact,
so we can simply drop it.
It becomes x or x'.
And then x or x' is the
complement of each other, so the
result cannot be identity
element of the other operator
which is and. So here is the
result. So X or one is equal to
1. Although you know from
the truth table now you can
prove it by the past. Let's
in the Boolean algebra.
So again, you can see that in
the left side you need one or
gate with. Two inputs, but in
the right you don't need any
gates, so it kind of reducing
the number of gates.
But you haven't seen this
theorem before, so this is the
new theorem. And as you can see
here is called absorption.
Absorption theorem, which says
that. If you see X or with
another term that has the
and operator, so you can simply
drop that term to X OR X&Y is
equal to X. It's kind of the
other term absorbed to the X.
But in general form, you can say
that if you see X Binary
variable ORed with other
terms, all these other terms has
X in the end operator. For
instance X&Y X&ZW or X and with
anything else all the other
terms are absorbed to the X. So
all these equation is equal to
X. So you can see that it it
helps with reducing the
number of gates instance for
this equation. Here you need
one or gate and one and gate,
but in the right side you
don't have any gates.
So let's prove this by using
the postulates So here is the
proof. X or X&Y is equal to.
You can add 1 here you can and
X with one because one is the
identity element and doesn't
have any influence, so you can
Re-return the X or X bar and one
or X&Y.
And then because of the
distributive property you can
extract X. Extract X the
remaining term become one or Y.
So if you distribute again, it
becomes X and one or X and or Y.
So is the same as this.
You know I have so and then you
based on the previous theorem
already knew that one or
anything. The result is 1. So
based on the previous theorem,
can simply say that the result
of the inside the Panthers is 1,
so it becomes and one.
And then one is the
identity element, so anding
with one having impact. So
it's equal to X.
This is called absorption theory
and is very important in the I
mean practice. so so
far. You see that how by proving
sum theorem we can help with
reducing the number of Gates.
Another theorem is called
duality. Before introducing the
duality theorem we have to say
what is the duality.
Duality is defined like this.
Any Boolean function for any
boolean expression or equation.
can have dual.
This on this you have to simply
interchange the OR gates with
and gates and and gates with or
get so whenever you see or make
it and. Whenever you see an and make
it or. Also you have to
interchange this zero and ones
whenever you see one you make
it 0. Whenever you see
zero, you make it 1.
pay attention the dual of
Boolean function doesn't
mean that it is equal to F, so
the dual is and totally
different equation and we build
the dual of the F like this. So
let's see some example. For
instance the dual X or one. So X
is same as X or becomes and and
one becomes 0. So the dual of X
or one is X and 0.
dual of this one ,X or X'
X and x' is the same but Or
becomes and so X or X' if you dual
it, it becomes X and X'.
dual of X or X X or
Y bar again X the same? Y the
same or becomes and not the same
So the only interchanges are and
with or an zero with one
The use of duality. Here's the
duality theorem. It says that if
you could prove some postulate, some
theory based on a boolean, if
you prove a theorem for function
F, or if you already have the
postulate that you accept as the
true for a boolean function F.
The same is true for the dual
of F , so if there is a postulate
for F. Same postulate that exists
for the dual of F.
If you have proved a
theorem for F, same is
true for the dual of F.
So this is very helping as we
can see in this example these
examples. Since you already knew
you already have the proof for X or
one is equal to 1.
So you are given a question that
you are asked to prove X and
zero is equal to 0. You could
say that we already prove it for
dual of itself. Do all of the
discussion 'cause they do all of
this expression is this.
X, or one if you make it, do
what it becomes X and 0 0. Make it
all comes zero.
One becomes 0, so the dual of
this expression is this to you
already proved the theorem for
this. You could say that it is
true also for the dual of that
theorem, which is this.
What are these saw the postulate
of complement for X or X' is
equal to 1. So for the dual of
this which is X&X Bar called to
0, so that is still true.
Also for this one, yeah the
third one is, I mean familiar
to you because of these are
the De Morgan's law?
This is the first law of de morgan X
or Y bar? If you bring did not
inside the parentheses it
becomes X' and Y bar?
So if you could prove this
using for instance, truth table an
if you are asked to prove this
second law, which is X&Y bar is
equal to bring the not inside
the parenthesis, becomes X'
or Y'. If you're asked to
prove the right, but you could
say that the right side is that
dual off the left side, you
already proved the left side,
so it is true for the dual of
its That expression.
Stop duality helps us too
sometimes. If it is hard to
prove a theorem I we can make it
dual and then prove the dual
of that expression an say that
because they dual of the
expression is true. The theorem
is also true.
Yeah, so that's your duality.
To prove this theory.
This is absorption, but for the
and operator. So in the OR
operator, let's back to the
absorption for or we said X or X&Y
is equal to X.
This one is said that X and X or Y
is equal to X. So basically
whenever X and with other terms
an all the other terms has X in
the OR operator.
Thought we could simply say
that all the other terms can
be absorbed to X.
In order to prove this, we could
simply say that this theorem,
theorem it, dual of this one.
But if you daul X becomes
X X&Y is the same and y the
same? And become or so this
and becomes OR and this
Or becomes and.
so the dual of this new theorem
is the theorem will prove.
So we said that we already
proved the theorem for the dual,
so it is also true for the dual
of this, which is this one?
So this is one advantage of
duality, so again, as you can
see here, in the left side you
have one and gate and one or
gate, but in the right side you
don't have any gate, so it's
kind of a simplification using
the Boolean theory.
we already knew how to prove
true stable, so.
It's not a need to cover this.
So there are two ways to prove
any boolean expression or
equality or inequality. One is
the truth table, one is the.
postulate using the Boolean
algebra postulate. It's an other
proved theorems and duality.
So we said all of these math
material just for this task
minimization. So let's do that.
For some samples, you are given
a boolean function like this.
So the first is the
mid term of four.
7 = 111 this is minterm
6 = 110 and this is
minterm 5 = 101. So if you
are given this Boolean function
and for designing this function
in logic circuits you need.
One AND here one AND here
one AND here one AND here
so you need 4 ANDs and each AND
must have 3 inputs.
Finally, you have to OR the
result, so 1234 you put the four
result into one OR gate, so you
need one 4-input-OR, so in
total you need 5 gates. So let's
see. Is it possible to minimize
it using the Boolean algebra?
So as you can see in all the
terms you can see, Z Binary
variable is repeated.
So it's kind of a Z is
distributed over all the other
terms, so you can simply use
the distributive property, you
can extract the Z
If you extract the Z,
other terms becomes inside
the parentheses. So Z
distributed over the OR
gate. So the other terms
becomes Y-bar X Bar, YX, Y X-bar and
Y-bar X.
And then inside the parenthesis
you also can do another
distributor. You can also use
another distributor. You can use
the distributive property
the 2nd way.
So as you can see here, the
Y-bar is repeated in these
two terms.
So again using the
distributive property you
can extract Y-bar.
So the result is this. If you
extract Y-bar, and now you can
see inside this parentheses when
you extract the Y-bar, you
have the complement property
Y-bar or X. So you already
knew that when you apply OR on
the complements of Binary
Variables, the result is gonna be
identity elements of the other
operator. Here is the identity
element of OR, the other
operator is 1, so X.
bar or X is equal to 1.
This is the complement property.
We can reduce it to 1 and
then one is the identity
element. You can simply drop it.
The same is with the other two
terms here. So in these two you
can extract Y.
And after that, inside the
parentheses you have X or X-bar, which
is the complement property, equal
to 1. We can simply drop one
because its the identity element or
the AND operator.
And then you see that
the inside the
parenthesis, you have
Y-bar OR Y.
Again, the complement property
and then the result is the
identity element of the AND and
you can simply drop the one for the
identity element of the AND
operator so you can see through
these slides that we use the
distributive possible and we use
the complement postulate in the
Boolean algebra to reduce the
Boolean function from 5 gates to
Zero gates.
So at first F is equal to sum of
four minterms, but in the end we
minimize it to just binary
variable Z, so there's no need
for the gate.
You could do the minimization
applying different postulates.
This is the exact function
and result just in the
previous slide, but you could
say that in these two terms the
Z Y-bar is repeated so you can
extract Z Y-bar
and then the remaining
part is X-bar or X, which
is equal to 1, also for the
other term, Z Y is repeated, so
you can extract the Z Y.
So in both the parentheses you
see the complement property, so
both becomes one.
And you can simply drop one,
ending with one doesn't have any
influence. And here is the
result and you can see that
the Z is repeated.
So you can extract the Z inside
the parentheses you have. Y
bar OR Y is equal to 1. Same
result. So, there are different ways
of minimizing the Boolean
function based on apply the
postulates. So, but again,
you can see that it helps us
with reaching the number of
gates to 0.
Another example is this.
If you are given this Boolean function.
Here, this is the minterm 110,
which is 6. This is a.
I guess there's a, let me see.
The first one let me fix this.
Sorry about that. This one must
be like this.
Yeah. It's back.
So here you see another
example. This is the minterm
for Z Y-bar X-bar, which
is the four = 110 and
this is the minterm 1 = 001.
Here for this Boolean
function you need 1 2 3 and
one final or.
So let's see, can we reduce the
number of cases using the
Boolean algebra? So as you can
see here, in the first 2 terms
you see that the Z and X-bar is
repeated, so you can extract it
because of the distributive
property of Boolean algebra.
So the remainder is Y-bar or Y
complement property of the
Boolean Algebra, which makes it
one, and then you can simply
drop one because of identity
property of AND and as a result
you have are minimized the
Boolean function from 4 gates,
to 1,2,3 gates. One AND here, one AND
here and one final OR.
And also you could reduce the
number of inputs, you already
need three input ANDs but here
one of the ANDs, you only need
two inputs for the OR. You
already need three inputs over
here for the OR, you need to
2 inputs. So not only do you
reduce the number of gates to
Three gates, it
could reduce the number
of inputs to the gate.
So this is the way we
minimize the Boolean function
using the algebra,
Boolean algebra postulates or
we can say we algebraically
Minimized the Boolean
function, but it has some
problems, the first one is
that you have to be smart.
You have to memorize all the
postulates, you have to memorize
all the theorems, and you have to
know where and what postulates
you apply. So it's kind of
proof by math, so proving the
math is a little bit
hard. Also sometimes I mean so
far for example, we only had few
terms and few binary variables.
But what if the number of
variables are more than three?
For instance, we have before 5, six
or seven binary variables.
And the number of minterms,
for instance 10 minterms
or 12 minterms. So then you have
a long function and you have
to be careful what binary
variable you extract and etc. So it's
very complicated.
And so basically the algebraic
minimization doesn't introduce
any algorithm, so it's kind of
Being smart and know already
how to apply the postulates
where to apply the postulates.
But the most important
problem of the algebraic
minimization is the result, you
are not sure if the result is
minimal, which means that you might
forget about some postulate that
if you apply in the result, could
reduce the Boolean function
better, so you are not sure that
the final result is minimal.
So because of this problem,
With the Boolean algebra, a new
method which is called map
method introduced by Maurice
Karnaugh. And this second method,
First of all, it's an algorithm.
So it's very straightforward, so
you don't memorize the postulates.
You only have to take step
by step of this algorithm to do
the reduced Boolean function. And
the important thing is this, the
result is guaranteed to be minimal,
so if you follow this step of this
algorithm, the result is going to be
always minimal. This is very
similar to the design algorithm
we introduced. We introduced
two design algorithms, POS and SOP
so whoever knows these steps,
that person can design a logic
circuit. Here whoever knows the
map algorithm easily can reduce
any Boolean function to its
minimal form. It's also
called graphical
manipulation and we see in a few
slides why we call it this.
So before I start the
map method, I'm ready
to take questions from
you. If you have any.
Is there any questions so far?
So to make sure that you hear me
or that you have the attention again
please, send me some feedbacks
just to make sure that you are
listening to the slides.
Mia.
Thank you Carter, Ali.
So.
Alexa, thank you. So there is no
question so far.
OK, seems we
can continue, so the map method.
The map method is another
representation of the truth
table in a way that
helps us too
Minimize the Boolean function by
an algorithm, by a pictorial or
by a graphical algorithm.
So you already know the truth
table is just putting the binary
variables in the left side and
all the rows of the possible
inputs; these are the two binary
variables, we have four
different possibilities. And
the function, the Boolean
function in the right side,
either one or zero. And then
we write the Boolean function as a sum of
minterms or product of the
maxterms.
Also, we could write the
Boolean function as a form of
minterms or
maxterms. So 2nd way to show
the Boolean expression
is through a Boolean function.
And then we said that you can
design the Boolean function as a
logic circuit. So logic circuit
is another way to show a Boolean
function. So there are three ways to
show the Boolean function, the
truth table, the Boolean
function by using the Boolean
algebra, and logic circuit.
How? Maurice Karnaugh,
who is right now actually
teaching computer
science topics. He wasta
physicist, mathematician, also
an inventor. In 1954 in Bell
Labs he published the paper,
which is called the map method,
for synthesis combination of
logic circuits. I put this
paper in the Blackboard so you
can browse it.
So that we can present the truth
table in another form in order
to help us with Minimization.
Because the table doesn't help
us for the Minimization, it just
shows the entries that the
Boolean function becomes one or
zero. So he actually
introduced a transformation to
the truth table in order to help
with minimization, but let's see
what's the transformation.
That's why we called this the map
method. He called it the map
method, after we called it the
the Karnaugh Map method.
Karnaugh method sorry, Karnaugh map.
Because of his name.
Let's start with one variable
Karnaugh Map. One variable
Karnaugh Map is like this, so the truth
table. You already know with one
variable it has two rows.
Minterm 0 and Minterm One.
But Karnaugh says that we can
reform, or we can represent truth
table like this.
So putting the rows as
cells and then X is either
zero or one. So we have two
cells for two rows.
So you might not see the benefit
of Karnaugh method with one
variable. So let's move on to
the two variable Karnaugh map.
For the two variables, instead
of having four rows.
Karnaugh says that we can
reform, or we can represent
the truth table like this,
having four cells.
And the way we represent the
minterms in the cells are
like this. So we put X here. X
is either zero or one and we put
Y here and Y is either zero
or one.  And the minterm 0 is
here because it is zero. 00.
Minterm one is here because
X is one and Y is 0. So 01
is in the minterm one.
In this cell we have minterm 2
because X is in this area, X is
0. But Y is 1. So 10 is the
minterm 2. Minterm three is here
because in this area, in this cell,
X is 1 and Y is 1.
So again, it's a
reformulation for or a
representation for truth
tables.
So let's see what's the benefit.
And one thing is that the order
of the minterm in the Karnaugh map
matters, so you don't. You
cannot simply say, for instance
m0 is here and m1 is here, etc.
So because these areas shows
where the value of X&Y. So the
order of the minterms in the
cells actually matters.
So for instance minterm
Three is here. Because X is one and Y is one.
So 11
is the minterm three.
So this is the way we
represent minterms in the
two variable Karnaugh map.
But imagine you're given the
Boolean function this,
which is only the minterm 0 in
the truth table.
Which is equal to the minterm 0, which
is equal to X-bar Y-bar.
So in order to show this
Boolean function in the
Karnaugh map is just simply put
one in the minterm cell. So
minterm 0 cell, we put one.
As you can see here in this
cell, X is zero, Y is 0, X-bar and Y
Bar makes the F = 1.
Maybe maybe so the next function
could be this, so minterm one, so
simply in the Karnaugh map we put
one in the minterm 1.
Minterm 2 here. In the truth
table we make it 1 here and
others rows are 0. Here in the cell
for the minterm 2, we put one and
other cells become zero, meaning
that other minterms are zero.
But in this cell, X is 0.
We have X not and Y, so Y
and X-bar
becomes one for the F.
Again, so far you didn't
see the benefit of Karnaugh
map, so let's move on. This
is the last function, for
minterm 3. Same as before.
But what if you have two rows
with one. For the two rows in the
truth table, we have sum of
minterm zero and one.
So let's minimize it by the
Boolean algebra. So for the
Boolean algebra we can have the
minterm 0 as Y-bar and X-bar
or Y-bar and X.
As you can see here, based on
the distributive property. You
can extract the Y-bar.
And inside the parentheses, the remainder
is X-bar or X.
So this is the complement
property, or it becomes one. So
Y-bar and Y is 1. 1 doesn't
have any influence so the result
is Y-bar.
So you can simply use the
Boolean algebra and the truth
table to minimize the function,
but as you can see, you have to know
the distributive property and
the complement property, but
let's see what happens in the
Karnaugh. The Karnaugh map, you don't
need to know the Boolean
postulates. Here. You can see
that in the whole area that you
have one. X doesn't matter
because X is zero or one, so the
value of X is not determining
the Boolean function F. The only
binary valuable that matters is
Y because in this area, Y
must be 0 and then we apply the
not to get Y-bar in order to make
F1. So we only care
about the area that the binary
variable actually matters.
So we could simply say that
this area is equal to Y-bar because
this area belongs to Y-bar.
Again, if you are given the
Boolean function like this,
which is the sum of minterm 2
and three, you have to apply the
Boolean function postulates or
minimize it based on the Boolean
function in the truth table. But
given the Karnaugh map, you see
that the minterm two and three
are these two cells and these
two cells actually create an
area at X. The value of X
doesn't matter. Only Binary
Variable which matters is Y,
which must be one. So the
Boolean function is equal to Y.
'cause in this area Y is 1 and
the function is equal to 1.
Another Boolean function is this,
sum of minterm one and three.
Again, by using the truth table,
and Boolean function, it's kind of
hard. Using postulates are hard.
It's kind of hard to minimize the
Boolean function. But using the
Karnaugh map you can see that.
The Minterms makes an area, shared Area
1 of . And in those cells in
this area, the value of Y
doesn't matter. In this area, Y
is either zero or one, so it
doesn't matter. The only thing
matters is the value of X, which
must be one. So the Boolean
function F is equal to X. X means
that whenever we have one, the
Boolean function going to be 1.
Another example is this.
Sum of minterm zero and two, so
you can see that by using the
Karnaugh map without knowing
Boolean postulates and etc can
simply say that in this area,
value of Y doesn't matter. The
only thing matters is the value
of X which is 0 and we have to
apply a not, so it is
equal to X-bar.
Do you see that with the Karnaugh
map, it's very easy to
minimize the Boolean function
because it's kind of
minimizing by adjacent cells
In the Karnaugh map.
So this is another example.
In this example,
you can see that.
Boolean function is the sum of
minterms 0, 1 and two.
So in order to minimize this
function using the Boolean postulates
you could say that here
is the minterms for the Boolean
function F. Here you can extract
Y-bar and then the other is X and
it's complement. And as a result,
this complement, it becomes one.
So Y-bar AND by one so you
can simply drop one,OR
Y X-bar so you end up with this.
But again, you don't know that
this is the minimal form.
But in the Karnaugh map you can
see that there are some shared
adjacent areas. For the
Karnaugh Map, for instance, for the
first area I would simply say
that the value of X doesn't
matter, only Y is equal to 0. So
Y-bar. Or this cell
which is X-bar Y.
X-bar. X is 0, X-bar becomes
one AND with Y.
You could minimize this
function by.
The Boolean postulates,
so you could extract X-bar.
And then this times Y-bar or
Y become complemented with each
other, so then it ends up with
another simplified form.
In the Karnaugh map it is like
this, instead of just
Using this shared area and this
one, you could say that I could
use this shared area and this
cell. So here the value of Y
doesn't matter and X must be 0.
So X-bar or this cell.
Again so far.
Karnaugh map helps because it's
a pictorial way to minimize.
But the amazing part of the
Karnaugh map is.
The Karnaugh map. You can have
overlapping cells, so in the
Karnaugh map, because say that.
This is 1 area.
And also for the second cell you
could extend the shared area
with the adjacent cell. So
this is another shared area. As
a result, you would say that for
the first shared area, the only thing
matters is Y with the value of
0. So Y-bar.
And the other shared area it this,
where the value of Y
doesn't matter, and the value of
X, which is zero, matters, so
it becomes X-bar. So you see
that the Boolean function F
becomes Y-bar or X-bar.
This is why Y-bar
OR X-bar
But if you wanted to prove this,
minimize form with the Boolean
expression. With Boolean
postulates, it's kind of hard
because here you have to go
through these steps.
Here you have to say that Y
bar and X-bar can be OR with each, with
itself without no effect,
because we already know that X
or X is equal to X, so any term
OR with itself doesn't have any
impact so, I add another Y-bar
and X-bar here.
And then this time you extract
Y-bar. Until you keep this.
This minterm. And in this
term, you extract X-bar.
And then you end up with X-bar
Y-bar OR X-bar
so here the genius part is here.
So you have to be. I mean you
have to know that, you have to
add another term here which
doesn't have impact in order to
finally reduce the function.
It's kind of hard though.
Maybe an Oracle or
experienced person told me that we
have to add this one, but the
Karnaugh map doesn't need such
knowledge or experience. The
only thing you need is
just to create the shared area in
the Karnaugh map in order to
minimize the Boolean function.
Another example would be this.
Imagine all the rows in the
truth table as one for the
Boolean function F.
So the Boolean function becomes
sum of minterms 0, 1, 2, 3.
So in order you can follow these
steps to minimize it by using
the Boolean postulates, but
without Boolean algebra and
postulates, by using the Karnaugh
map, you can see that all the
minterms are one, so they create
a shared adjacent cells.
And the value of X doesn't
matter in all these shared, the
value of Y doesn't matter,
all are one. So you can simply
say that F is equal to 1.
Without caring about the Binary
Variables X&Y, because whatever
X&Y is, all the
cells are one.
So it's very quick and a
simple way and algorithmic way to
Minimize the Boolean function.
However, imagine we are
given this Boolean function, with minterms
one and two.
Uh, the Boolean expression by
using the truth table, sum of
minterms becomes this.
The Karnaugh map we have this.
These two cells are not adjacent
to each other, so in the Karnaugh
map you're allowed to create
shared sells by the adjacent
cells. Not by diagonal cells, so
again, with the Karnaugh map, you
can simply say there's no shared
area, so we can make sure that
you cannot minimize the function
anymore. But given the truth
table and the Boolean function
and the knowledge of Boolean
expression. The knowledge of
Boolean algebra, you would say
that is there any possibility
that we can minimize this
function anymore, and you have to
think and think and then finally
you could say that I don't know
of any possibility to minimize it
more, but with the Karnaugh map,
we can simply say that there is no
adjacent cell. There's no way
to minimize this Boolean function.
That's it. At least you know
that this is the minimal form
and there is no way to
minimize it anymore.
In fact, I mean, whenever you
see a diagonal cells in the
Karnaugh map, it's kind of a hint
that there is no way to minimize
the Boolean function.
Because there is no
adjacent cell and there's
no shared area in the Karnaugh map.
Let's see what is the three
variable Karnaugh map; for the
three valuable Karnaugh map, you
can simply attached two Karnaugh
maps with two variables.
So this is the three
variable Karnaugh map. This is the
truth table, which becomes the
Karnaugh map like this.
Again, pay attention to the way
we represent the minterms in the
three variable Karnaugh map.
In the Karnaugh map, the first 2 variables
comes here X&Y, and these are
the value of X&Y. So either they
are both 0.
Y is 0, X is 1. Both are one.
Or Y is 1, X is zero and the
last variable comes here.
Either it is zero or one.
And the way we represent the
minterms are like this. So
m0 is where all the
variables are 0000.
m1 is when the Z is zero, Y is
zero and X is 1, so it is
minterm one, etc. But here you
can see that the minterm three is
here and minterm two is here.
So this is because in minterm three,
the Z is zero, and X and Y is
1 so this is the minterm 3.
So the way we represent minterms
in the Karnaugh map for the three
variable is like this. 012
And then goes here, 2 3, and
then comes here, 4 5, and then goes
here 6 7.
So as I said, the order of
meetings in the Karnaugh map
matters.
And this is because of the, I
mean the area of these cells. So
minterm 7. This is minterm 7 because in this
cell, X is 1, Y is 1, Z is
1, so this is it minterm 7.
The area that Y is 1 is this area
in the right side. As you can
see here in this area, Y is 1.
And in the left side, Y prime.
We have Y prime because Y is 0
so whenever Y is zero, Y prime becomes
one, so in this area,
Y prime becomes one.
And for the Z. You can see that
in the first row, these are ones, so
the 1st row is Z-bar.
And the second row, Z is one. So the
2nd row is Z, the 2nd row is
the area of Z. The first row
is the area of Z-bar.
However, for the X.
The cells in the middle.
Those mean X is 1.
How about the X-bar?
X-bar as you can see here in
these two cells, the X is 0, so
X-bar is one and these two
cells minterm 2 and 6.
X is zero, X-bar is 1, so these
two cells are the area of
X-bar. But you might say that
these two are kind of
disconnected. The thing is,
When Maurice Karnaugh
introduced the Karnaugh map, he
introduced it as a continuous
amount. So if you imagine the
map as a flat surface, you can
bend the two sides of the flat
surface and attach it in order
to make it roll, so in other words
The left side of the Karnaugh map
is attached to the right side of
the Karnaugh map, but because we are
representing in 2D surfaces,
That's why we disconnected the two
sides. In reality, in 3D, these
two edges are connected with
each other. So these
two cells and these two
cells are actually 4 cells
connected with each other.
So these two areas are the
X-bar, so all the shared
area for Z, Z-bar, X, X-bar,
Y, Y-bar, are all continuous.
Adjacent cells.
So let's practice to minimize a
Boolean function with three
variables. So. Imagine this
is the Boolean function with
three variables X&Y&Z.
And this is the Boolean function
sum of minterms.
The minterms are 0,1,2,3 and then six
and seven. So these are the
minterms as we already saw in
the sum of products or SOP.
And now you're asked to minimize
it, if you wanted to minimize it with the
Boolean postulates you have to
use the Boolean property, the
complement property and other
postulates. But with the Karnaugh
map you can see that
this area, those cells with one
have shared adjusting cells.
So what are those shared areas?
One of them is this?
Which is the area of Z-bar.
And the other one is thism,
the shared area where Z must be
one, Y must be one. But it
doesn't matter if the value of X
is zero or one because in this
area, X is either zero or one. So
the only thing that matters is the
value of ZY. So ZY.
As you saw in the two
variable Karnaugh map, we can extend
the adjacent cells. We can
have overlapping, so for the
this area we can extend with an
overlap with the other shared
area, so you can see that we
have an area where the value of
Z doesn't matter in these areas.
These cells, the value of Z is
either zero and one, so you can
simply drop the Z. The only thing
matters is the value of Y, which
is 1. So by just creating the
shared adjacent cells
we can simply minimize
the Boolean function.
One thing is that he said that
we could come up with the
reduced logic circuits by using
the product of Maxterms.
So because we only have two rows
with 0, instead of writing the
sum of minterms, we could say we
could write product of Maxterms
because it has only two maxterms. So
basically F is equal to the
product of maxterms four and
five. So this is the maxterm, so
then you have to minimize it by
using the Boolean algebra
postulates, but given the Karnaugh
map, you can see that there are
two cells with zero.
How can we simplify it using the
Karnaugh map. It's very simple,
we can simply say that let's write
the Karnaugh map for F bar.
So to create the Karnaugh
map for F bar, we could simply just
make use the cells of 00 01 for Z = 1.
And this is the simplified F bar or F
prime. So if you simplify the F
bar, the minterm of the
this one, the four and five, the
shared area. The only thing that
matter is the value of Z and the
value of Y, which is 0, so Z Y-bar shares
adjusting cells. But the value
of X doesn't matter if it's 0
Or one. So you could write a
simplified form for F bar, so you
can simply do another not.
In order to come back to the
function F, so F bar followed by
another bar is equal to the
simplified form of the F bar.
The Y-bar followed by another
Not, by the De Morgan's Law,
It is equal to Z-bar OR Y.
So again, using the Karnaugh map,
not only you can simplify
in sum of products, you can
also simplify it as a product of
sum. So you can simply say that
let's create a shared area with
zero cells, and then do another
not on top of it.
So these are different forms. Or
as you can see, both the product
of Maxterms of the Karnaugh map and
the sum of minterms with Karnaugh
map end with the same result.
However, if you wanted to
minimize it using the Boolean
expression or Boolean
postulates. It's kind of hard. I
mean to come up with the
distributive property, and then
complement property and etc. And
you can see that there are lots
of terms and it might be
confusing for you, but with the Karnaugh
because it's a pictorial form,
easy to simplify.
So at home you can practice
this example. You can see
this slides for another
function like this.
And you can see because the
kernel map is continuous in
these two edges, you can create a
shared area for this Boolean
function and the only thing
matters if the value of X
going to be 0. So X-bar is
the simplified form of this
function.
You can write in a form of
product of Maxterms and you can
practice these last two slides
at home and if you have
questions, you can ask in the
next lecture, but we are done
with the one variable, two
variable, and three variable
Karnaugh maps. You can see
how it is easy to use the
Karnaugh map to simplify a Boolean
function. In the next lecture,
we're going to continue with the
four variable Karnaugh map and
another thing which is called the
don't care condition. And then
we start with the next chapter,
which is the combinatorial circuits.
So I'm ready for your
questions. If you have any.
Is there any questions?
Seems there is no question, so
we're going to finish this
lecture and I'm going to be in
the office hour for your
questions. If you have any
also about the lecture
assignments or lab
assignments, I'm ready for
your questions. In the office
hour. Thank you so much.
Have a great day.